Add cross-deployment dependencies guide (#3684)
astronomer/docs: astro/best-practices/cross-deployment-dependencies.md

In this guide, you'll learn how to use Astro Alerts and Airflow Datasets to create cross-deployment dependencies. Astro supports cross-deployment dependencies in any Workspace or cluster. **Note**: while the specific advice here applies to Astro, the general concepts are also applicable to your Airflow environments outside Astro.

## Feature Overview

This guide highlights when to use the following Astro and Airflow features to create dependencies across Astro deployments:

- [Astro Alerts](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/alerts). Recommended for most Astro use cases as no code modification is required.
- [Airflow Datasets](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/airflow-datasets.md). Can be used to trigger a DAG after a task in another DAG updates a dataset.

## Best Practice Guidance

While the Airflow API can also be used to create cross-deployment dependencies, you will likely find either Astro Alerts or Airflow Datasets to be better suited to your needs.

To determine whether an Astro Alert or the Datasets feature is the right solution for your use case, consider their different purposes. 

> Astro Alerts, configurable in the Astro UI, fire on DAG failure or success, a task taking longer than expected, or a DAG not completing in time. Alerts are a no-code option best for cases when DAGs do not create or update datasets or there are few pipelines in an organization. 

Reviewer: I think we can clarify the guidance in this and the next paragraph a bit. A couple bits of general feedback, and we can chat about how that would best be implemented in the text here if that's helpful :)

- I think you're on track with alerts being a good no-code option here. But I would phrase it as when DAGs do not already use the datasets feature (since "datasets" is confusingly both a feature and a concept).
- What do you mean by "few pipelines in an organization"? Let's clarify how that related specifically to choosing a method.
- When talking about using the datasets feature, I would focus less on it being a more natural way of authoring, and more on it offering more flexibility around cross-dag (and cross-deployment) dependencies. Like we talked about before, datasets allow you to implement a many:1 DAG dependency where astro alerts would not. It's also easier to implement a 1:many dependency with datasets (at least today, you can't do this in astro alerts without creating many alerts), and allows you to implement the dependency at the task level (when you said "triggering at the DAG level" - did you mean task level)?
- Generally this might be easier to present in two bulleted lists - one for scenarios where you should choose alerts, and one for when you should choose datasets.

Author: @kentdanas thanks for the feedback -- the section has been revised to address these points

Datasets in Airflow, by contrast, offer a solution for cross-DAG and cross-deployment triggering at the DAG level. Airflow Datasets represent a significant evolution in the way Airflow can be used to orchestrate pipelines and, for some users, offer a more natural way of expressing pipelines than traditional DAGs. If your pipelines are, like most pipelines, oriented around producing or updating a piece of data, being able to schedule runs based on whether a dataset has been updated is convenient -- especially in larger organizations where it can be hard to know which pipelines are responsible for producing the dataset in question.

**Note:** Before Airflow 2.9, Datasets were only available within a single deployment. As of Airflow 2.9, you can poll for dataset changes via the REST API *from* another deployment or push changes *to* other deployments via the Listener API.

## Astro Alerts Example

### Assumed Knowledge

To use Astro Alerts to create cross-deployment dependencies, you should have an understanding of:

- Airflow DAGs. See [Introduction to Airflow DAGs](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/dags.md).

> - Airflow operators. See [Operators 101](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/what-is-an-operator.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I don't think we need operators here specifically.

- Creating and managing Astro deployments. See [Create a deployment](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/create-deployment).

### Implementation

> This example shows you how to create dependencies between DAGs in different Astro deployments using Astro's Alerts feature. Cross-deployment dependencies can also be configured using the Airflow API. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows you how to create dependencies between DAGs in different Astro deployments using Astro's Alerts feature.
```

#### Prerequisites

> - The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/overview).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
They can do all of this within astro, nothing local needed :)

> - Two [Astro Deployments](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/create-deployment).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Two [Astro Deployments](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/create-deployment), each containing at least one DAG.
```

> - Two [Astro projects](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/develop-project#create-an-astro-project).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Removing in favor of updating the prior bullet

#### Process

Creating a dependency between DAGs in different deployments is easy with an alert trigger on Astro. 

1. First, [create a deployment API token](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/deployment-api-tokens) for the deployment containing the DAG you want to serve as the trigger.

> 2. Navigate to Alerts in the workspace sidebar and create a new alert.

Reviewer: Let's link to our alerting doc in the text here, so people can go there if they need more guidance

3. Give the alert a name you'll remember, select an alert type (e.g., `DAG Success`), and then select `DAG Trigger` as the communication channel.

> 4. In the deployment dropdown menu, select the deployment containing the DAG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. In the deployment dropdown menu for the `DAG Trigger` communication channel, select the deployment containing the downstream DAG.
```
We should probably use "upstream" and "downstream" DAG like we do in the cross-DAG dependencies guide, and define them here up front (also like we do in that one) for consistency

> 5. In the `DAG NAME` dropdown, select the DAG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. In the `DAG NAME` dropdown, select your downstream DAG.
```

6. Paste your API token in the `DEPLOYMENT API TOKEN` field.
7. Run both DAGs and verify that the alert is functioning as expected.

![Alert dialog](/img/guides/cross-deployment-alert-dialog.png)

## Datasets Example

### Assumed Knowledge

To use Airflow Datasets to create cross-deployment dependencies, you should have an understanding of:

- Airflow DAGs. See [Introduction to Airflow DAGs](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/dags.md).
- [Airflow Datasets](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/airflow-datasets.md).
- The [Airflow API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html).

### Implementation

> This section explains how to use the [Airflow API's Datasets endpoint](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html#tag/Dataset) to trigger a consumer DAG in another deployment by updating a dataset. A consumer DAG is any DAG that has been scheduled with a dataset.

Reviewer: Let's explain here why we're using a listener to implement this. Listeners aren't by definition related to datasets, so this is actually opinionated guidance we're providing.

2. In the same deployment, using the guidance in [Airflow REST API](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/airflow-api#step-2-retrieve-the-deployment-url), obtain the deployment URL for your other deployment using the Astro CLI and store it in an environment variable alongside the API token variable, setting the key as `DEPLOYMENT_URL`. 
3. In the same deployment, implement a listener following the guidance in the [Create Airflow listeners tutorial](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/airflow-listeners). In place of the `listeners_code.py` code provided there, use the following code to create the listener:

```
from airflow.datasets import Dataset
from airflow.listeners import hookimpl
import requests
import os

token = os.environ.get('API_KEY')
deployment_url = os.environ.get('DEPLOYMENT_URL')
dag_id = "consumer_dag"

@hookimpl
def on_dataset_changed(dataset: Dataset):
    """Execute if a dataset is updated."""
    print("I am always listening for any Dataset changes and I heard that!")
    if dataset.uri == "file://include/bears":
        print("Oh! This is the bears dataset!")
        response = requests.post(

>             url=f"{deployment_url}/api/v1/dags/{dag_id}/dagRuns",

Reviewer: shouldn't this line be updated to the datasets endpoint?

            headers={
                "Authorization": f"Bearer {token}",
                "Content-Type": "application/json"
            },
            data='{}'
        )
        print(response.json())
```

4. Use the DAG, unchanged, from the tutorial and deploy the project to Astro.
5. Deploy a DAG of any kind to your other Astro deployment, using a `dag_id` of `consumer_dag`.

For example:

```
from airflow.decorators import dag, task
from datetime import datetime
from airflow.operators.empty import EmptyOperator

@dag(
    dag_id="consumer_dag",
    start_date=datetime(2023, 12, 1),

>     schedule="0 0 * * 0",

Reviewer: If this is the downstream DAG, shouldn't it have a dataset schedule that matches the dataset URI defined in the listener code? (file://include/bears in that example)

    catchup=False,
    doc_md=__doc__,
)
def consumer_dag():
    @task
    def nada(): EmptyOperator()

    nada()

consumer_dag()
```

> Running the DAG in the first deployment should trigger the DAG in the second. While HttpOperator could also be used to trigger the consumer, an advantage of this approach is that the DAG will run whenever the dataset is updated -- regardless of which DAG is performing the update. This saves you the trouble of implementing an API call in every DAG upstream of the dataset you are monitoring.

Reviewer: Ah, didn't read far enough with my last comment :) let's move some of this context up into the implementation section.

---
title: "Cross-deployment dependencies"
sidebar_label: "Cross-deployment dependencies"
description: "How to implement dependencies between your Airflow deployments."
id: cross-deployment-dependencies
---

import CodeBlock from '@theme/CodeBlock';

> [Cross-DAG dependencies](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/cross-dag-dependencies.md) serve a common use case: configuring a DAG to run when a separate DAG or a task in another DAG completes or updates a dataset. But what about situations in which a dataset or DAG you are monitoring exists in a separate deployment? For example, you might want to make a task dependent on a dataset's being updated by a DAG that is owned by a different team and, hence, located in a separate deployment. Astro also supports the orchestration of tasks via this kind of relationship, which is referred to as a cross-deployment dependency.  

Author: Hi @lzdanski , think this edit changes the meaning slightly because it's suggesting that the DAG being in a separate deployment is a consequence of wanting to make the task dependent (or something like that). How about: "For example, you might want to make a task dependent on an a dataset update in a DAG that is owned by a different team and, hence, located in a separate deployment."?

## Astro alerts example

### Assumed knowledge

To use Astro Alerts to create cross-deployment dependencies, you should have an understanding of:

- Airflow DAGs. See [Introduction to Airflow DAGs](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/dags.md).
- Creating and managing Astro deployments. See [Create a deployment](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/create-deployment).

### Implementation

This example shows you how to create dependencies between DAGs in different Astro deployments using Astro Alerts.

#### Prerequisites

- Two [Astro Deployments](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/create-deployment), each containing at least one DAG.

#### Process

Creating a dependency between DAGs in separate deployments is easy with an alert trigger on Astro. 

1. First, [create a deployment API token](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/deployment-api-tokens) for the upstream deployment.
2. Navigate to [Alerts](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/alerts) in the workspace sidebar and create a new alert.

> 3. Give the alert a name you'll remember, select an alert type (e.g., `DAG Success`), and then select `DAG Trigger` as the communication channel.

Author: Thank you -- this is good to know

import os

TOKEN = os.environ.get("API_KEY")
DEPLOYMENT_URL = os.environ.get("DEPLOYMENT_URL")

@hookimpl
def on_dataset_changed(dataset: Dataset):
    """Execute if a dataset is updated."""
    if dataset.uri == "file://include/bears":
        payload = {
            "dataset_uri": dataset.uri
        }
        response = requests.post(
            url=f"https://{DEPLOYMENT_URL}/api/v1/datasets/events",
            headers={
                "Authorization": f"Bearer {TOKEN}",
                "Content-Type": "application/json",
                "Accept": "application/json"
            },
            json=payload
        )
        print(response.json())

```

4. Add the following DAG to your Astro project.

```
from airflow.datasets import Dataset
from airflow.decorators import dag, task
from pendulum import datetime

URI = "file://include/bears"
MY_DATASET = Dataset(URI)

@dag(
    start_date=datetime(2023, 12, 1),
    schedule="0 0 * * 0",
    catchup=False,
    doc_md=__doc__,
)
def producer_dag():
    @task(
        outlets=[MY_DATASET],
    )
    def get_bear():
        print("Update the bears dataset")

    get_bear()

producer_dag()

```

5. Deploy the project to Astro.

> 6. Deploy a DAG of any kind to your downstream deployment, using a `dag_id` of `consumer_dag` and scheduling it on the same dataset in the `producer_dag`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Deploy a DAG of any kind to your downstream Deployment. In this DAG, use a `dag_id` of `consumer_dag` and schedule it on the same dataset in the `producer_dag`.
```

For example:

```
from airflow.decorators import dag, task
from datetime import datetime
from airflow.operators.empty import EmptyOperator
from airflow.datasets import Dataset

URI = "file://include/bears"

@dag(
    dag_id="consumer_dag",
    start_date=datetime(2023, 12, 1),
    schedule=[Dataset(URI)],
    catchup=False,
    doc_md=__doc__,
)
def consumer_dag():
    @task(task_id="empty")
    def nada(): EmptyOperator()

    nada()

consumer_dag()

```

> After deploying both projects to their respective deployments on Astro, you should see your `consumer_dag` being triggered automatically by runs of your `producer_dag`. If the downstream DAG is not firing, verify that the upstream deployment's environment variables (the API key and deployment URL) correspond to the downstream deployment. Also, a properly functioning listener will emit an API response payload containing DAG run information related to the dataset. Check the task logs for output that looks similar to this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After deploying both projects to their respective Deployments on Astro, you should see runs of your `producer_dag` trigger your `consumer_dag` automatically. If the downstream DAG is not firing, verify that the upstream Deployment's environment variables, the `API_KEY`  and `DEPLOYMENT_URL`, correspond to the downstream Deployment's API Token and Deployment URL. Also, a properly functioning listener will emit an API response payload containing DAG run information related to the dataset. Check the task logs for output that looks similar to this:
```

It's a little confusing that we have users configuring the API_KEY variable but using information from a Token. Is that correct?

Author: We could change `token` to `key` in the request. Would that take care of it?

## Best practice guidance

Astro Alerts and Airflow Datasets are the best methods for implementing cross-deployment dependencies. The `dagRuns` endpoint of the Airflow API can also be used for this purpose, but it is less flexible than the other methods and not recommended.

To determine whether an Astro Alert or the Datasets feature is the right solution for your use case, consider the following guidance. 

**Astro Alerts:**

You can use Astro alerts to implement cross-deployment DAG dependencies using the DAG trigger communication channel. They are simple to implement and are the preferred method in the following situations: 
- If you need to implement a dependency trigger based on any DAG state other than success, such as a DAG failure, a task taking longer than expected, or a DAG not completing by a certain time. 
- If you need to implement a simple one-to-one cross-deployment dependency (one upstream DAG triggers one downstream DAG) and do not want to update your DAG code.
- When your DAGs do not already use the Datasets feature and when it is easy to identify the relevant dependent DAGs, which is not always the case in larger organizations. 

**Airflow Datasets:**

> Datasets represent a significant evolution in the way Airflow can be used to define dependencies and, for some, offer a more natural way of expressing pipelines than traditional DAGs. Datasets offer more flexibility for cross-deployment dependencies than Astro alerts, are the preferred method in the following scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datasets represent a significant evolution in the way Airflow can be used to define dependencies and, for some, offer a more natural way of expressing pipelines than traditional DAGs. Datasets offer more flexibility for cross-deployment dependencies than Astro alerts, and are the preferred method in the following scenarios:
```

While you can also use the HttpOperator to make the API request to update the dataset, an advantage of using a listener is that the dataset is updated and the downstream DAG runs whenever _any_ DAG updates the dataset. This means you don't need to implement an API call in every upstream DAG that updates the same dataset.
 
#### Prerequisites

- Two [Astro Deployments](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/create-deployment).
- A [Deployment API token](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/deployment-api-tokens), [Workspace API token](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/workspace-api-tokens), or [Organization API token](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/organization-api-tokens) for one of your deployments. This deployment will host your downstream DAG.
- Two [Astro projects](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/develop-project#create-an-astro-project).

#### Process

> 1. In your upstream Deployment, which is the Deployment  for which you did **not** create an API Token, use **Variables** in the Astro UI to create an environment variable for your API token, and use `API_TOKEN` for the key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In your upstream Deployment, which is the Deployment for which you did **not** create an API Token, use **Variables** in the Astro UI to create an environment variable for your API token, and use `API_TOKEN` for the key.
```

2. For your downstream Deployment, follow the guidance in [Airflow REST API](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/airflow-api#step-2-retrieve-the-deployment-url) to obtain the Deployment URL for your downstream Deployment. 
3. In your upstream Deployment, use Variables in the Astro UI to create an environment variable where you can store your downstream Deployment URL, using `DEPLOYMENT_URL` for the key.
4. In the upstream Deployment, implement a listener following the guidance in the [Create Airflow listeners tutorial](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/airflow-listeners). Use the following code in place of the `listeners_code.py` code provided there:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
```
This will add syntax highlighting in the rendered version :)

from airflow.datasets import Dataset
from airflow.listeners import hookimpl
import requests
import os

TOKEN = os.environ.get("API_TOKEN")
DEPLOYMENT_URL = os.environ.get("DEPLOYMENT_URL")

@hookimpl
def on_dataset_changed(dataset: Dataset):
    """Execute if a dataset is updated."""
    if dataset.uri == "file://include/bears":
        payload = {
            "dataset_uri": dataset.uri
        }
        response = requests.post(
            url=f"https://{DEPLOYMENT_URL}/api/v1/datasets/events",
            headers={
                "Authorization": f"Bearer {TOKEN}",
                "Content-Type": "application/json",
                "Accept": "application/json"
            },
            json=payload
        )
        print(response.json())

```

4. Add the following DAG to your Astro project.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
```

from airflow.datasets import Dataset
from airflow.decorators import dag, task
from pendulum import datetime

URI = "file://include/bears"
MY_DATASET = Dataset(URI)

@dag(
    start_date=datetime(2023, 12, 1),
    schedule="0 0 * * 0",
    catchup=False,
    doc_md=__doc__,
)
def producer_dag():
    @task(
        outlets=[MY_DATASET],
    )
    def get_bear():
        print("Update the bears dataset")

    get_bear()

producer_dag()

```

5. Deploy the project to Astro.
6. Deploy a DAG of any kind to your downstream Deployment. In this DAG, use a `dag_id` of `consumer_dag` and schedule it on the same dataset in the `producer_dag`.

For example:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
```

In this guide, you'll learn how to use Astro Alerts and Airflow Datasets to create cross-deployment dependencies. Astro supports cross-deployment dependencies in any Workspace or cluster. 

## Feature overview

This guide explains when to use the following Astro and Airflow features to create dependencies across Astro deployments:

- [Astro Alerts](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/alerts). Recommended for most Astro use cases as no code modification is required.
- [Airflow Datasets](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/airflow-datasets.md). Can be used to trigger a DAG after a task in another DAG updates a dataset.

## Best practice guidance

Astro Alerts and Airflow Datasets are the best methods for implementing cross-deployment dependencies. The `dagRuns` endpoint of the Airflow API can also be used for this purpose, but it is less flexible than the other methods and, therefore, not recommended.

> To determine whether an Astro Alert or the Datasets feature is the right solution for your use case, consider their different purposes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To determine whether an Astro Alert or the Datasets feature is the right solution for your use case, consider the following guidance. 
```
Updating this section to be a little more directly prescriptive.

> **Astro Alerts:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Astro Alerts:**

Astro alerts can be used to implement cross-deployment DAG dependencies using the DAG trigger communication channel. They are simple to implement and are the preferred method in the following situations: 
```

> - fire on DAG failure or success, a task taking longer than expected, or a DAG not completing in time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you need to implement a dependency trigger based on any DAG state other than success, such as a DAG failure, a task taking longer than expected, or a DAG not completing by a certain time. 
```

> - offer a no-code option for creating simple dependencies between DAGs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you need to implement a simple one to one cross-deployment dependency (one upstream DAG triggers one downstream DAG) and do not want to update your DAG code.
```

> - are best for cases when DAGs do not already use the Datasets feature and when it is easy to identify the relevant dependent DAGs, which is not always the case in larger organizations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When your DAGs do not already use the Datasets feature and when it is easy to identify the relevant dependent DAGs, which is not always the case in larger organizations. 
```

> **Airflow Datasets:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Airflow Datasets:**

Datasets represent a significant evolution in the way Airflow can be used to define dependencies and, for some users, offer a more natural way of expressing pipelines than traditional DAGs. They offer more flexibility for cross-deployment dependencies than Astro alerts, are the preferred method in the following scenarios:
```

> - represent a significant evolution in the way Airflow can be used to orchestrate pipelines and, for some users, offer a more natural way of expressing pipelines than traditional DAGs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - provide more flexibility around cross-DAG and cross-deployment dependencies than Alerts. For example, Datasets allow you to implement a many-to-one DAG dependency such that a DAG can be made dependent on the completion of multiple other DAGs or tasks, which is not possible using Alerts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You need to implement dependencies in a many-to-one pattern, such that a DAG can be made dependent on the completion of multiple other DAGs or tasks. This is not possible using Astro Alerts.
```

> - provide an easier way to create a one-to-many dependency such that multiple DAGs or tasks are triggered by one DAG or task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You need to implement dependencies in a one-to-many pattern, such that multiple DAGs or tasks are triggered by one DAG or task. This is also possible using Astro Alerts, but requires a separate alert for each dependency.
```

- Creating and managing Astro deployments. See [Create a deployment](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/create-deployment).

### Implementation

This example shows you how to create dependencies between DAGs in different Astro deployments using Astro Alerts.

#### Prerequisites

- Two [Astro Deployments](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/create-deployment), each containing at least one DAG.

#### Process

Creating a dependency between DAGs in separate deployments is easy with an alert trigger on Astro. 

1. First, [create a deployment API token](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/deployment-api-tokens) for the upstream deployment.
2. Navigate to [Alerts](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/alerts) in the workspace sidebar and create a new alert.
3. Give the alert a name you'll remember, select an alert type (e.g., `DAG Success`), and then select `DAG Trigger` as the communication channel.
4. In the deployment dropdown menu for the `DAG Trigger` communication channel, select the downstream deployment.
5. In the `DAG NAME` dropdown, select the DAG to be triggered.
6. Paste your API token in the `DEPLOYMENT API TOKEN` field.

> 7. Run both DAGs and verify that the alert is functioning as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Run the upstream DAG and verify that the alert triggers and the downstream DAG runs as expected.
```

![Alert dialog](/img/guides/cross-deployment-alert-dialog.png)

## Datasets example

### Assumed knowledge

To use Airflow Datasets to create cross-deployment dependencies, you should have an understanding of:

- Airflow DAGs. See [Introduction to Airflow DAGs](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/dags.md).
- [Airflow Datasets](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/airflow-datasets.md).
- The [Airflow API](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html).

### Implementation

> This section explains how to use a listener in combination with the [Airflow API's Datasets endpoint](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html#tag/Dataset) to trigger a consumer DAG in another deployment when a dataset is updated. A consumer DAG is any DAG that has been scheduled with a dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section explains how to use a listener in combination with the [Airflow API's Datasets endpoint](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/stable-rest-api-ref.html#tag/Dataset) to trigger the downstream DAG in another deployment when a dataset is updated. Typical dataset implementation only works for DAGs in the same Airflow deployment, but by using the API, this pattern can be implemented across deployments.
```
"consumer" is used in teh context of datasets, but I think to make this more straightforward we can use "downstream" for this guide.

> While HttpOperator could also be used to trigger the consumer, an advantage of using a listener is that the DAG will run whenever the dataset is updated -- regardless of which DAG is performing the update. This avoids the need to implement an API call in every DAG upstream of the dataset being monitored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While HttpOperator could also be used to make the API request to update the dataset, an advantage of using a listener is that the dataset will be updated and the downstream DAG will run whenever _any_ DAG updates the dataset. This avoids the need to implement an API call in every upstream DAG that updates the same dataset.
```

- Two [Astro projects](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/develop-project#create-an-astro-project).

#### Process

1. In the deployment you did **not** get your token from (your upstream deployment) use Variables in Astro to create an environment variable for your API token and use `API_KEY` for the key.
2. Following the guidance in [Airflow REST API](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/airflow-api#step-2-retrieve-the-deployment-url), obtain the deployment URL for your downstream deployment and store it in an environment variable in your upstream deployment alongside the API token variable, using `DEPLOYMENT_URL` for the key.
3. In the upstream deployment, implement a listener following the guidance in the [Create Airflow listeners tutorial](https://docs.astronomer.io/learn/airflow-listeners). Use the following code in place of the `listeners_code.py` code provided there:

```
from airflow.datasets import Dataset
from airflow.listeners import hookimpl
import requests
import os

TOKEN = os.environ.get("API_KEY")
DEPLOYMENT_URL = os.environ.get("DEPLOYMENT_URL")

@hookimpl
def on_dataset_changed(dataset: Dataset):
    """Execute if a dataset is updated."""

>     print("I am always listening for any Dataset changes and I heard that!")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    if dataset.uri == "file://include/bears":

>         print("Oh! This is the bears dataset!")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

        payload = {
            "dataset_uri": dataset.uri
        }
        response = requests.post(
            url=f"https://{DEPLOYMENT_URL}/api/v1/datasets/events",
            headers={
                "Authorization": f"Bearer {TOKEN}",
                "Content-Type": "application/json",
                "Accept": "application/json"
            },
            json=payload
        )
        print(response.json())

```

> 4. Put the DAG from the tutorial in the same project's `dags` folder. Then, referring to the guidance in [Connections and variables](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/manage-connections-variables), modify the DAG to upload to S3 (or another cloud provider) instead of ingesting locally. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Add the following DAG to your Astro project.
```

```
from airflow.datasets import Dataset
from airflow.decorators import dag, task

> from airflow.io.path import ObjectStoragePath

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

from pendulum import datetime

> import requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

URI = "file://include/bears"
MY_DATASET = Dataset(URI)

> OBJECT_STORAGE_INGEST = "s3"
> CONN_ID_INGEST = "AWS_CONN"
> PATH_INGEST = "bucket/subdir/"
> BASE_PATH_INGEST = ObjectStoragePath(
>     f"{OBJECT_STORAGE_INGEST}://{PATH_INGEST}", conn_id=CONN_ID_INGEST
> )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
What the DAG does isn't actually relevant here, so removing some of the storage stuff for simplicity. Maybe double check I didn't create a syntax issue though :)

@dag(
    start_date=datetime(2023, 12, 1),
    schedule="0 0 * * 0",
    catchup=False,
    doc_md=__doc__,

>     tags=["on_dataset_changed listener", "2-8"],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

)
def producer_dag():
    @task(
        outlets=[MY_DATASET],
    )

>     def get_bear(base):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    def get_bear():
```

>         r = requests.get("https://placebear.com/300/300")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        print("Update the bears dataset")
```

>         file_path = base / "bear.jpg"
> 
>         if r.status_code == 200:
>             base.mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
>             file_path.write_bytes(r.content)
>             file_path.replace("bear.jpg")
>         else:
>             print(f"Failed to retrieve image. Status code: {r.status_code}")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     get_bear(base=BASE_PATH_INGEST)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    get_bear()
```
